docs/source/configuration.rst, before:

.. _configuration:
.. include:: references.rst

******************
Configuration
******************

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 2

After you have installed `Weaver`, you can customize its behaviour using multiple configuration settings.


Configuration Settings
=======================================

All settings are configured using a ``weaver.ini`` configuration file. A `weaver.ini.example`_ file is provided
with default values to help in the configuration process. Explanations of respective settings are also available in
this example file.

The configuration file tell the application runner (e.g. `Gunicorn`_, ``pserve`` or similar WSGI HTTP Server), how to
execute `Weaver` as well as all settings to provide in order to personalize the application. All settings specific to
`Weaver` employ the format ``weaver.<setting>``.

Most configuration parameters for the *manager* portion of `Weaver` (i.e.: WSGI HTTP server for API endpoints) are
defined in the ``[app:main]`` section of `weaver.ini.example`_, while parameters specific to the *worker* (task queue
handler) are within ``[celery]`` section. Note that multiple settings are shared between the two applications, such as
the ``mongodb.[...]`` configuration or ``weaver.configuration`` options. When parameters are shared, they are usually
expected to be placed in ``[app:main]`` section.

Following is a partial list of most predominant settings specific to `Weaver`. Many parameters provide alternative or
extended functionality when employed in conjunction with other settings. Others are sometimes not necessarily required
to be defined if *default* behaviour is desired. Refer to the relevant details that will describe in which condition
they are optional and which default value or operation is applied in each situation.

.. note::

    Refer to `weaver.ini.example`_ for the extended list of applicable settings.
    Some advanced configuration settings are also described in other sections of this page.


- | ``weaver.configuration = ADES|EMS``
  | (default: ``DEFAULT``)
  |
  | Tells the application in which mode to run.
  |
  | Enabling `ADES` for instance will disable some `EMS`-specific operations such as dispatching :ref:`Workflow`
    process steps to known remote `ADES` servers. `ADES` should be used to run processes locally (as the working unit).
  | Default configuration will provide very minimalistic operations as both other variants will be unavailable.

- | ``weaver.url = <url>``
  | (default: ``https://localhost``)
  |
  | Defines the full URL (including HTTP protocol/scheme, hostname and optionally additional path suffix) that will
    be used as base URL for all other URL settings of `Weaver`.

.. note::

    This is the URL that you want displayed in responses (e.g.: ``processDescriptionURL`` or job ``location``).
    For the effective URL employed by the WSGI HTTP server, refer to ``[server:main]`` section of `weaver.ini.example`_.

- | ``weaver.wps = true|false``
  | (default: ``true``)
  |
  | Enables the WPS-1/2 endpoint.

 .. warning::

     At the moment, this setting must be ``true`` to allow job execution as the worker monitors this endpoint.
     This could change with future developments (see issue `#21 <https://github.com/crim-ca/weaver/issues/21>`_).

- | ``weaver.wps_path = <url-path>``
  | ``weaver.wps_url = <full-url>``
  | (default: *path* ``/ows/wps``)
  |
  | Defines the URL to employ as WPS-1/2 endpoint.
  |
  | It can either be the explicit *full URL* to use or the *path* relative to ``weaver.url``.
  | Setting ``weaver.wps_path`` is ignored if its URL equivalent is defined.
  | The *path* variant **SHOULD** start with ``/`` for appropriate concatenation with ``weaver.url``, although this is
    not strictly enforced.

- | ``weaver.wps_output_s3_bucket = <s3-bucket>``
  | (default: ``None``)
  |
  | AWS S3 bucket where to store WPS outputs. Used in conjunction with ``weaver.wps_output_s3_region``.
  |
  | When this parameter is defined, any job result generated by a process execution will be stored (uploaded)
    to that location. If no bucket is specified, the outputs fall back to using the location specified by
    ``weaver.wps_output_dir``.

.. versionadded:: 1.13.0
.. seealso::
    `Configuration of AWS S3 Buckets`_

- | ``weaver.wps_output_s3_region = <s3-region>``
  | (default: ``None``)
  |
  | AWS S3 region to employ for storing WPS outputs. Used in conjunction with ``weaver.wps_output_s3_bucket``.
  |
  | When this parameter is defined as well as ``weaver.wps_output_s3_bucket``, it is employed to define which `S3`
    to write output files to. If not defined but ``weaver.wps_output_s3_bucket`` is specified, `Weaver` attempt to
    retrieve the region from the profile defined in `AWS` configuration files or environment variables.

.. versionadded:: 1.13.0
.. seealso::
    `Configuration of AWS S3 Buckets`_

- | ``weaver.wps_output_dir = <directory-path>``
  | (default: ``/tmp``)
  |
  | Location where WPS outputs (results from jobs) will be stored for stage-out.
  |
  | When ``weaver.wps_output_s3_bucket`` is specified, only WPS XML status and log files are stored under this path.
    Otherwise, job results are also located under this directory with a sub-directory named with the job ID.
  | This directory should be mapped to `Weaver`'s WPS output URL to serve them externally as needed.

- | ``weaver.wps_output_path = <url-path>``
  | ``weaver.wps_output_url = <full-url>``
  | (default: *path* ``/wpsoutputs``)
  |
  | Endpoint that will be employed as prefix to refer to WPS outputs (job results).
  |
  | It can either be the explicit *full URL* to use or the *path* relative to ``weaver.url``.
  | Setting ``weaver.wps_output_path`` is ignored if its URL equivalent is defined.
  | The *path* variant **SHOULD** start with ``/`` for appropriate concatenation with ``weaver.url``, although this is
    not strictly enforced.

- | ``weaver.wps_workdir = <directory-path>``
  | (default: uses automatically generated temporary directory if none specified)
  |
  | Prefix where process job worker should execute the process from.

- | ``weaver.wps_restapi = true|false``
  | (default: ``true``)
  |
  | Enable the WPS-REST endpoint.

.. warning::

    `Weaver` looses most, if not all, of its useful features without this, and there won't be much point in using
    it without REST endpoint, but it should technically be possible to run it as WPS-1/2 only if desired.

- | ``weaver.wps_restapi_path = <url-path>``
  | ``weaver.wps_restapi_url = <full-url>``
  | (default: *path* ``/``)
  |
  | Endpoint that will be employed as prefix to refer to WPS-REST requests
  | (including but not limited to |ogc-proc-api|_ schemas).
  |
  | It can either be the explicit *full URL* to use or the *path* relative to ``weaver.url``.
  | Setting ``weaver.wps_restapi_path`` is ignored if its URL equivalent is defined.
  | The *path* variant **SHOULD** start with ``/`` for appropriate concatenation with ``weaver.url``, although this is
    not strictly enforced.

- | ``weaver.wps_metadata_[...]`` (multiple settings)
  |
  | Metadata fields that will be rendered by either or both the WPS-1/2 and WPS-REST endpoints (:ref:`GetCapabilities`).

- | ``weaver.wps_email_[...]`` (multiple settings)
  |
  | Defines configuration of email notification functionality on job completion.
  |
  | Encryption settings as well as custom email templates are available. Default email template defined in
    `email-template`_ is employed if none is provided. Email notifications are sent only on job
    completion if an email was provided in the :ref:`Execute` request body (see also: :ref:`Email Notification`).


.. note::

    Since `Weaver` employs `Celery`_ as task queue manager and `MongoDB`_ as backend, relevant settings for the
    |celery-config|_ and the |celery-mongo|_ should be referred to. Processing of task jobs and results reporting
    is accomplished according to the specific implementation of these services. Therefore, all applicable settings
    and extensions should be available for custom server configuration and scaling as needed.

.. |celery-config| replace:: configuration of Celery
.. _celery-config: https://docs.celeryproject.org/en/latest/userguide/configuration.html#configuration
.. |celery-mongo| replace:: configuration of MongoDB Backend
.. _celery-mongo: https://docs.celeryproject.org/en/latest/userguide/configuration.html#mongodb-backend-settings


Configuration of AWS S3 Buckets
=======================================

Any `AWS` `S3` bucket accessed by `Weaver` needs to be accessible by the application, whether it is to fetch input
files or to store output results. This can require from the server administrator to specify credentials by one of
reference |aws-cred-support|_ to provide necessary role and/or permissions. See also reference |aws-config|_ which
list various options that will be considered when working with `S3` buckets.

.. |aws-cred-support| replace:: supported methodologies
.. _aws-cred-support: `aws-credentials`_

Note that `Weaver` expects the |aws-config|_ to define a *default profile* from which the AWS
client can infer which *region* it needs to connect to. The `S3` bucket to store files should be defined by
``weaver.wps_output_s3_bucket`` setting as presented in the previous section.

The `S3` file references for input and output in `Weaver` are expected to be formatted as::

    s3://<bucket>/<file-key>

This implicitly tells `Weaver` to employ the `S3` bucket it was configured with as well as the automatically retrieved
region from the `AWS` server configuration.

Alternatively, the reference can be provided with the more explicit `AWS` `S3` link such as::

    https://s3.[region-name.]amazonaws.com/<bucket>/<file-key>

In this situation, `Weaver` will parse it as equivalent to the prior shorthand reference format, as long as the `AWS`
server configuration matches with all associated details from the HTTP URL variant. If this is not the case, `Weaver`
will still attempt to fetch the file as *standard* HTTP reference, but read access should be granted accordingly to the
corresponding bucket and file such that `Weaver` can access it.

Finally, in the above references, ``file-key`` is used as *anything after* the bucket name. In other words, this value
can contain any amount of ``/`` separators and details. For example, `Weaver` will store process output results to `S3`
using ``file-key`` as a combination of ``<WPS-UUID>/<output-id>.<ext>``, therefore forming the full job result file
references as::

    https://s3.<region-name>.amazonaws.com/<bucket>/<WPS-UUID>/<output-id>.<ext>


.. note::
    Value of ``WPS-UUID`` can be retrieved from `Weaver` internal job storage from :meth:`weaver.datatypes.Job.wps_id`.
    It refers to the process execution identifier that accomplished the WPS request to run the `Application Package`.


Configuration of Data Sources
=======================================

.. todo:: complete docs

`data_sources.yml.example`_


Configuration of WPS Processes
=======================================

`Weaver` allows the configuration of services or processes auto-deployment using definitions from a file formatted
as `wps_processes.yml.example`_. On application startup, provided references in ``processes`` list will be employed
to attempt deployment of corresponding processes locally. Given that the resources can be correctly resolved, they
will immediately be available from `Weaver`'s API without further request needed.

For convenience, every reference URL in the configuration file can either refer to explicit process definition
(i.e.: endpoint and query parameters that resolve to :ref:`DescribeProcess` response), or a group of processes
under a common WPS server to iteratively register, using a :ref:`GetCapabilities` WPS endpoint. Please refer to
`wps_processes.yml.example`_ for explicit format, keywords supported, and their resulting behaviour.

.. note::
    Processes defined under ``processes`` section registered into `Weaver` will correspond to a local snapshot of
    the remote resource at that point in time, and will not update if the reference changes. On the other hand, their
    listing and description offering will not require the remote service to be available at all time until execution.

.. versionadded:: 1.14.0
    When references are specified using ``providers`` section instead of ``processes``, the registration
    only saves the remote WPS provider endpoint to dynamically populate WPS processes on demand.

    Using this registration method, the processes will always reflect the latest modification from the
    remote WPS provider.

To specify a custom YAML file, you can define the setting named ``weaver.wps_processes_file`` with the appropriate path
within the employed ``weaver.ini`` file that starts your application. By default, this setting will look for the
provided path as absolute location, then will attempt to resolve relative path (corresponding to where the application
is started from), and will also look within the |weaver-config|_ directory. If none of the files can be found, it will
try to use a copy of `wps_processes.yml.example`_.

To disable this feature and avoid any auto-deployment provided by this functionality, simply set setting
``weaver.wps_processes_file`` as *undefined* (i.e.: nothing after ``=`` in ``weaver.ini``).

.. seealso::
    - `weaver.ini.example`_
    - `wps_processes.yml.example`_


Configuration of Request Options
=======================================

.. todo:: complete docs

``weaver.ssl_verify``


.. versionadded:: 1.8.0

`request_options.yml.example`_


Starting the Application
=======================================

.. todo:: complete docs

``make start`` (or similar command)

- need to start ``gunicorn/pserve`` (example `Dockerfile-manager`_)
- need to start ``celery`` worker (example `Dockerfile-worker`_)

Commit message:

avoid error due to copy of example config files

docs/source/configuration.rst, after:

.. _configuration:
.. include:: references.rst

******************
Configuration
******************

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 2

After you have installed `Weaver`, you can customize its behaviour using multiple configuration settings.


Configuration Settings
=======================================

All settings are configured using a ``weaver.ini`` configuration file. A `weaver.ini.example`_ file is provided
with default values to help in the configuration process. Explanations of respective settings are also available in
this example file.

The configuration file tell the application runner (e.g. `Gunicorn`_, ``pserve`` or similar WSGI HTTP Server), how to
execute `Weaver` as well as all settings to provide in order to personalize the application. All settings specific to
`Weaver` employ the format ``weaver.<setting>``.

Most configuration parameters for the *manager* portion of `Weaver` (i.e.: WSGI HTTP server for API endpoints) are
defined in the ``[app:main]`` section of `weaver.ini.example`_, while parameters specific to the *worker* (task queue
handler) are within ``[celery]`` section. Note that multiple settings are shared between the two applications, such as
the ``mongodb.[...]`` configuration or ``weaver.configuration`` options. When parameters are shared, they are usually
expected to be placed in ``[app:main]`` section.

Following is a partial list of most predominant settings specific to `Weaver`. Many parameters provide alternative or
extended functionality when employed in conjunction with other settings. Others are sometimes not necessarily required
to be defined if *default* behaviour is desired. Refer to the relevant details that will describe in which condition
they are optional and which default value or operation is applied in each situation.

.. note::

    Refer to `weaver.ini.example`_ for the extended list of applicable settings.
    Some advanced configuration settings are also described in other sections of this page.


- | ``weaver.configuration = ADES|EMS``
  | (default: ``DEFAULT``)
  |
  | Tells the application in which mode to run.
  |
  | Enabling `ADES` for instance will disable some `EMS`-specific operations such as dispatching :ref:`Workflow`
    process steps to known remote `ADES` servers. `ADES` should be used to run processes locally (as the working unit).
  | Default configuration will provide very minimalistic operations as both other variants will be unavailable.

- | ``weaver.url = <url>``
  | (default: ``https://localhost``)
  |
  | Defines the full URL (including HTTP protocol/scheme, hostname and optionally additional path suffix) that will
    be used as base URL for all other URL settings of `Weaver`.

.. note::

    This is the URL that you want displayed in responses (e.g.: ``processDescriptionURL`` or job ``location``).
    For the effective URL employed by the WSGI HTTP server, refer to ``[server:main]`` section of `weaver.ini.example`_.

- | ``weaver.wps = true|false``
  | (default: ``true``)
  |
  | Enables the WPS-1/2 endpoint.

 .. warning::

     At the moment, this setting must be ``true`` to allow job execution as the worker monitors this endpoint.
     This could change with future developments (see issue `#21 <https://github.com/crim-ca/weaver/issues/21>`_).

- | ``weaver.wps_path = <url-path>``
  | ``weaver.wps_url = <full-url>``
  | (default: *path* ``/ows/wps``)
  |
  | Defines the URL to employ as WPS-1/2 endpoint.
  |
  | It can either be the explicit *full URL* to use or the *path* relative to ``weaver.url``.
  | Setting ``weaver.wps_path`` is ignored if its URL equivalent is defined.
  | The *path* variant **SHOULD** start with ``/`` for appropriate concatenation with ``weaver.url``, although this is
    not strictly enforced.

- | ``weaver.wps_output_s3_bucket = <s3-bucket>``
  | (default: ``None``)
  |
  | AWS S3 bucket where to store WPS outputs. Used in conjunction with ``weaver.wps_output_s3_region``.
  |
  | When this parameter is defined, any job result generated by a process execution will be stored (uploaded)
    to that location. If no bucket is specified, the outputs fall back to using the location specified by
    ``weaver.wps_output_dir``.

.. versionadded:: 1.13.0
.. seealso::
    `Configuration of AWS S3 Buckets`_

- | ``weaver.wps_output_s3_region = <s3-region>``
  | (default: ``None``)
  |
  | AWS S3 region to employ for storing WPS outputs. Used in conjunction with ``weaver.wps_output_s3_bucket``.
  |
  | When this parameter is defined as well as ``weaver.wps_output_s3_bucket``, it is employed to define which `S3`
    to write output files to. If not defined but ``weaver.wps_output_s3_bucket`` is specified, `Weaver` attempt to
    retrieve the region from the profile defined in `AWS` configuration files or environment variables.

.. versionadded:: 1.13.0
.. seealso::
    `Configuration of AWS S3 Buckets`_

- | ``weaver.wps_output_dir = <directory-path>``
  | (default: ``/tmp``)
  |
  | Location where WPS outputs (results from jobs) will be stored for stage-out.
  |
  | When ``weaver.wps_output_s3_bucket`` is specified, only WPS XML status and log files are stored under this path.
    Otherwise, job results are also located under this directory with a sub-directory named with the job ID.
  | This directory should be mapped to `Weaver`'s WPS output URL to serve them externally as needed.

- | ``weaver.wps_output_path = <url-path>``
  | ``weaver.wps_output_url = <full-url>``
  | (default: *path* ``/wpsoutputs``)
  |
  | Endpoint that will be employed as prefix to refer to WPS outputs (job results).
  |
  | It can either be the explicit *full URL* to use or the *path* relative to ``weaver.url``.
  | Setting ``weaver.wps_output_path`` is ignored if its URL equivalent is defined.
  | The *path* variant **SHOULD** start with ``/`` for appropriate concatenation with ``weaver.url``, although this is
    not strictly enforced.

- | ``weaver.wps_workdir = <directory-path>``
  | (default: uses automatically generated temporary directory if none specified)
  |
  | Prefix where process job worker should execute the process from.

- | ``weaver.wps_restapi = true|false``
  | (default: ``true``)
  |
  | Enable the WPS-REST endpoint.

.. warning::

    `Weaver` looses most, if not all, of its useful features without this, and there won't be much point in using
    it without REST endpoint, but it should technically be possible to run it as WPS-1/2 only if desired.

- | ``weaver.wps_restapi_path = <url-path>``
  | ``weaver.wps_restapi_url = <full-url>``
  | (default: *path* ``/``)
  |
  | Endpoint that will be employed as prefix to refer to WPS-REST requests
  | (including but not limited to |ogc-proc-api|_ schemas).
  |
  | It can either be the explicit *full URL* to use or the *path* relative to ``weaver.url``.
  | Setting ``weaver.wps_restapi_path`` is ignored if its URL equivalent is defined.
  | The *path* variant **SHOULD** start with ``/`` for appropriate concatenation with ``weaver.url``, although this is
    not strictly enforced.

- | ``weaver.wps_metadata_[...]`` (multiple settings)
  |
  | Metadata fields that will be rendered by either or both the WPS-1/2 and WPS-REST endpoints (:ref:`GetCapabilities`).

- | ``weaver.wps_email_[...]`` (multiple settings)
  |
  | Defines configuration of email notification functionality on job completion.
  |
  | Encryption settings as well as custom email templates are available. Default email template defined in
    `email-template`_ is employed if none is provided. Email notifications are sent only on job
    completion if an email was provided in the :ref:`Execute` request body (see also: :ref:`Email Notification`).


.. note::

    Since `Weaver` employs `Celery`_ as task queue manager and `MongoDB`_ as backend, relevant settings for the
    |celery-config|_ and the |celery-mongo|_ should be referred to. Processing of task jobs and results reporting
    is accomplished according to the specific implementation of these services. Therefore, all applicable settings
    and extensions should be available for custom server configuration and scaling as needed.

.. |celery-config| replace:: configuration of Celery
.. _celery-config: https://docs.celeryproject.org/en/latest/userguide/configuration.html#configuration
.. |celery-mongo| replace:: configuration of MongoDB Backend
.. _celery-mongo: https://docs.celeryproject.org/en/latest/userguide/configuration.html#mongodb-backend-settings


Configuration of AWS S3 Buckets
=======================================

Any `AWS` `S3` bucket accessed by `Weaver` needs to be accessible by the application, whether it is to fetch input
files or to store output results. This can require from the server administrator to specify credentials by one of
reference |aws-cred-support|_ to provide necessary role and/or permissions. See also reference |aws-config|_ which
list various options that will be considered when working with `S3` buckets.

.. |aws-cred-support| replace:: supported methodologies
.. _aws-cred-support: `aws-credentials`_

Note that `Weaver` expects the |aws-config|_ to define a *default profile* from which the AWS
client can infer which *region* it needs to connect to. The `S3` bucket to store files should be defined by
``weaver.wps_output_s3_bucket`` setting as presented in the previous section.

The `S3` file references for input and output in `Weaver` are expected to be formatted as::

    s3://<bucket>/<file-key>

This implicitly tells `Weaver` to employ the `S3` bucket it was configured with as well as the automatically retrieved
region from the `AWS` server configuration.

Alternatively, the reference can be provided with the more explicit `AWS` `S3` link such as::

    https://s3.[region-name.]amazonaws.com/<bucket>/<file-key>

In this situation, `Weaver` will parse it as equivalent to the prior shorthand reference format, as long as the `AWS`
server configuration matches with all associated details from the HTTP URL variant. If this is not the case, `Weaver`
will still attempt to fetch the file as *standard* HTTP reference, but read access should be granted accordingly to the
corresponding bucket and file such that `Weaver` can access it.

Finally, in the above references, ``file-key`` is used as *anything after* the bucket name. In other words, this value
can contain any amount of ``/`` separators and details. For example, `Weaver` will store process output results to `S3`
using ``file-key`` as a combination of ``<WPS-UUID>/<output-id>.<ext>``, therefore forming the full job result file
references as::

    https://s3.<region-name>.amazonaws.com/<bucket>/<WPS-UUID>/<output-id>.<ext>


.. note::
    Value of ``WPS-UUID`` can be retrieved from `Weaver` internal job storage from :meth:`weaver.datatypes.Job.wps_id`.
    It refers to the process execution identifier that accomplished the WPS request to run the `Application Package`.


Configuration of Data Sources
=======================================

.. todo:: complete docs

`data_sources.yml.example`_


Configuration of WPS Processes
=======================================

`Weaver` allows the configuration of services or processes auto-deployment using definitions from a file formatted
as `wps_processes.yml.example`_. On application startup, provided references in ``processes`` list will be employed
to attempt deployment of corresponding processes locally. Given that the resources can be correctly resolved, they
will immediately be available from `Weaver`'s API without further request needed.

For convenience, every reference URL in the configuration file can either refer to explicit process definition
(i.e.: endpoint and query parameters that resolve to :ref:`DescribeProcess` response), or a group of processes
under a common WPS server to iteratively register, using a :ref:`GetCapabilities` WPS endpoint. Please refer to
`wps_processes.yml.example`_ for explicit format, keywords supported, and their resulting behaviour.

.. note::
    Processes defined under ``processes`` section registered into `Weaver` will correspond to a local snapshot of
    the remote resource at that point in time, and will not update if the reference changes. On the other hand, their
    listing and description offering will not require the remote service to be available at all time until execution.

.. versionadded:: 1.14.0
    When references are specified using ``providers`` section instead of ``processes``, the registration
    only saves the remote WPS provider endpoint to dynamically populate WPS processes on demand.

    Using this registration method, the processes will always reflect the latest modification from the
    remote WPS provider.

To specify a custom YAML file, you can define the setting named ``weaver.wps_processes_file`` with the appropriate path
within the employed ``weaver.ini`` file that starts your application. By default, this setting will look for the
provided path as absolute location, then will attempt to resolve relative path (corresponding to where the application
is started from), and will also look within the |weaver-config|_ directory. If none of the files can be found, the
operation is skipped.

To ensure that this feature is disabled and to avoid any unexpected auto-deployment provided by this functionality,
simply set setting ``weaver.wps_processes_file`` as *undefined* (i.e.: nothing after ``=`` in ``weaver.ini``).

.. seealso::
    - `weaver.ini.example`_
    - `wps_processes.yml.example`_


Configuration of Request Options
=======================================

.. todo:: complete docs

``weaver.ssl_verify``


.. versionadded:: 1.8.0

`request_options.yml.example`_


Starting the Application
=======================================

.. todo:: complete docs

``make start`` (or similar command)

- need to start ``gunicorn/pserve`` (example `Dockerfile-manager`_)
- need to start ``celery`` worker (example `Dockerfile-worker`_)
